---
layout: post
title: Agile and High Performance Computing
---

When I began research in computational physics in my junior year, the academic
job market was bleak. It was 1992, and many physicists were leaving eastern
Europe and Russia for jobs in the United States. A year later the supercollider
was canceled, further dimming job prospects for my friends in high energy
physics. However, I had few worries. My physics courses were fascinating, and I
was thrilled with the opportunity to combine my two passions—computer
programming and theoretical physics—in practical scientific research. Besides,
people told me that with computational physics skills students could easily get
computer jobs. Universities had been at the forefront of computer development,
far ahead of the computer industry.

In the late 1990’s all that changed. The development of the personal computer
had launched the consumer software market a decade earlier. Bill Gates 
[pioneered the idea of selling software][GatesLetter],
and Microsoft dominated consumer software.
Throughout the 1990’s a second consumer software revolution accompanied the
explosive growth of the world wide web. Startup companies competed aggressively
to profit from and drive the dot-com-revolution. While academics 
[had produced the first web browser][Mosaic]
and incubated many companies, I believe that academic
high-performance computing and the commercial software business bifurcated at
that time.

Out of the fierce competition and rapid change of the dot-com-era, Agile
software development emerged. While the 
[Agile manifesto][Manifesto] is written in the
language of commercial or consumer software, its principles resonate with the
needs of scientific and engineering programming. Three principles—“we value
interactions of individuals over processes and tools,” “working software over
comprehensive documentation,” and “responding to change over following a
plan”—perfectly describe the decades-long culture of scientific computing. One
principle—“Customer collaboration over contract negotiation”—is a little less
applicable, since most scientific software is only used by the scientist who
wrote the code.

Agile software development never took a hold in academic high-performance
computing. This could be viewed as an example of academic arrogance, but I
believe there were more pragmatic issues. Scientists often tackle very difficult
problems at the forefront of computational abilities. Compilers and other tools
in use in the late 1990’s were not good enough to support Agile methodologies in
serious scientific computing. C++ compilers and computers themselves were simply
too slow and unable to optimize the programming style embraced by the Agile
community.

In 2013, we face two challenges. First, the bifurcation of academic and
commercial computing fifteen years ago has created a situation where students in
computational physics are no longer well-trained for most industry jobs.
Teaching students Unix and how to code Fortran or kludgy C++ is not great for
their resumes. Second, fierce academic competition and the availability of
powerful software packages—especially tools for molecular dynamics, quantum
chemistry, and symbolic mathematics—hinders development of new scientific
software.

Now is the time for academics to embrace Agile methodologies. The tools for C++
have matured, workstations are supercomputers, and development of the new 
[clang compiler][Clang]
suggests that things will just get better. Science needs reliable
software that responds quickly to change. In my experience students embrace
Agile methodologies and test driven development once they see how it works. No
manifesto or fiat will change academic culture, but pragmatic development of new
practices and shared examples help everyone.

[GatesLetter]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Letter_to_Hobbyists
[Mosaic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosaic_(web_browser)
[Manifesto]: http://agilemanifesto.org/
[Clang]: http://clang.llvm.org/
