---
layout: post
title: Continuous Integration on Travis CI
---

Continuous integration is the most technically involved software engineering
feature that I have added to my open source pi-qmc code. In software
development, “integration” refers to the process of bringing together all the
pieces into a usable application. Continuous integration is the practice of
always keeping the software in a usable state. In particular, continuous
integration implies an automated process to build and test the software at
regular intervals, preferably each time someone checks in new source code.

The problems that continuous integration addresses are very clear. There have
been many times that I have given another scientist a tarball with our current
code, only to find out it was broken. A common situation is that a collaborator
asks for source code, then emails back a few days later asking if there is a
problem. Usually scientists think they can solve problems themselves, and they
will hesitate to ask a simple question that I could have easily helped out with.
A second problem is when source code compiles fine, but an old feature has been
broken by new development, but no one knew that because the student who used the
feature has moved on to new things.

Continuous integration has many benefits: (1) we always know that the current
source code will compile without manual intervention, (2) unit tests can be
automatically run at each commit, in case some of our developers aren’t checking
them carefully, (3) important but often unused  features can be added to
automated test suites so we know right away if they are broken, and (4) the
configuration files for building and testing the code serve as concise
documentation for how to build and install the software.

I found [Travis CI][TravisCI]
to be a great resource for continuous integration of
open-source software. I configured the site to be automatically triggered
whenever anyone commits new source code to 
[pi-qmc][PI-QMC] on GitHub. At that point,
Travis CI creates a clean virtual linux machine, installs the required software
dependencies, grabs the latest pi-qmc source code from GitHub, compiles and
links the software, runs unit tests, and runs some system integration tests. If
any stage in that process has an error, I am emailed immediately so that I can
fix the problem.

The configuration for Travis CI is stored in a YAML document in the root
directory of the source code, 
[.travis.yml][TravisYML]. This file contains all the
information to download and test the pi-qmc code! Having an automated process
ensures that anyone can download and install our software; there are no
unintended in-house hacks or other special rules to build the pi-qmc code.

[TravisCI]: http://travis-ci.org/phys-tools/pi-qmc
[PI-QMC]: https://github.com/phys-tools/pi-qmc
[TravisYML]: https://github.com/phys-tools/pi-qmc/blob/master/.travis.yml
