---
layout: post
title: GitHub and LinkedIn
---

I’ve been thinking a lot about careers and how people can succeed in today’s job
market. As a computational physics professor, students would sometimes ask me
about how to find jobs that use programming, math, and physics. Now, working for
a startup company, I get to interview job candidates who have physics, math, and
programming backgrounds. When I come home, I see my three teenage boys, and I
think about what kind of jobs they will get. I have a lot of thoughts about
programming and science careers, and would like to devote some blog posts to
developing job skills.

To start, I’d like to repeat some simple advice I heard from a recruiter at
Dessert Code Camp in Arizona. That is a great (and free!) community event that
brings together programmers, students, recruiters, and businesses to help build
up the computer culture in the Phoenix valley. Some programmers were there
eagerly seeking tools to land a job. I listened in on a job recruiter’s talk at
the end of the day, feeling a little guilty to be there with a cushy
tenured-professorship, but very interested to see the real world that my
students have to face. The recruiter said two things that I have repeated many
times since: get a GitHub account and get a LinkedIn account, and really use
them.

GitHub seemed a bit obvious to me. Everyone needs a portfolio: my brother was an
art student and had a collection of his best work, I was a Ph. D. physics
student and had my collection of published papers, my daughter is a journalism
student and has a large portfolio of her work. If you want to get a programming
job, people need to see your work. GitHub is great! You put together a public
profile of the open-source projects you contribute to, and your source commits
are logged. Employers can see how you distribute your programming work among
projects and how long you have been active. They can look at your code style and
how your individual contributions interact with collaborative efforts. They can
even see which days of the week you contribute the most code! Employers who
really understand programming can quickly identify talented people.

LinkedIn was a bit more of a puzzle to me. I always viewed it as a
social-networking pyramid scheme. The recruiter instantly pointed out its real
value. You can post your resumé, professional network, and other credentials
online, and it’s all perfectly acceptable! It used to be that you had to conceal
your efforts to shop around for jobs for fear of being punished at work. Sites
like Monster were like dating sites, focused on people aggressively looking for
jobs, either out of desperation or with insatiable career ambition. With
LinkedIn, the majority of us who are happy with our jobs suddenly have our
credentials always online. It can help provide some extra job security and helps
us be ready when the opportunity or need to get a new job arises. The best
appreciation I have for LinkedIn was after I joined Stone Ridge Technology, when
my boss insisted that all his employees have active and impressive LinkedIn
pages to help him recruit new talent.

I told these things to students when I was a professor. I tell them to my kids.
I wish more professors and university departments would promote this
professionalism. There is a lot of talent out there, and if more people used
GitHub and LinkedIn effectively, recruiting and hiring would be more efficient.
